PRICEMM Protocol for Injuries
• PROTECTION: This simply means remove the athlete from participation to avoid further injury. All too
often, young athletes are taught to “suck it up” and “play through the pain.” Athletes take on a “no pain, no
gain” attitude. Players and coaches need to realize pain is the body’s way of saying something is wrong, and
activity should be stopped immediately.
• REST: For the initial 24 hours after an acute sports injury, the athlete should minimize use of the injured
body part. This can be done by using a sling, brace, wrap or crutches. Resting the injured body part will
minimize further tissue damage. After 24 hours, the athlete may begin mild range of motion exercises, as
directed by a physician, physical therapist, or athletic trainer; to prevent stiffness or promote the formation
of a strong, flexible scar.
• ICE: Ice is the universal treatment for acute sports injuries; however recent evidence has shown that it
should be used in moderation. Crushed ice should be applied directly to the injured body part immediately
after the injury occurs, if possible. Ice should be applied in 10 minute intervals, with a minimum break of 10
minutes between icing. Total duration of icing should not exceed 20 minutes every one to four hours.
Crushed ice in a zip-top bag with a small amount of water or bags of frozen peas or corn can be applied
directly to the skin. Commercial gel packs should be avoided if possible, because they get much colder than
ice. If a gel pack is used, place a cloth or towel between the pack and the skin to prevent frostbite. Ice
should be applied for at least 48 to 72 hours after a sports injury occurs and longer if swelling persists. Do
not apply heat within the first 72 hours after a sports injury. This will increase blood flow, fluid leakage and
worsen swelling.
• COMPRESSION: Direct pressure can limit the amount of swelling. Compression can be applied with
elastic wraps, braces or ice bags. One very helpful treatment of ankle sprains is the application of a
horseshoe-shaped felt pad, held by an elastic wrap directly over the outside ankle bone. This has been
shown to reduce swelling and improve mobility.
• ELEVATION: Elevating the injured body part helps drain extra fluid away from the injury site.
• MOTION: The athlete may begin mild range of motion (non-weight bearing) exercises 24 hours after a
sports injury occurs, and to a degree that does not cause severe pain. For example, for a sprained ankle, the
athlete should use the big toe to trace all capital letters of the alphabet, while seated in a chair.
• MEDICINE: When and if to start medicine is still controversial. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen and naproxen have anti-inflammatory and pain relieving properties. These
medicines should ideally NOT be taken until about 72 hours after an injury occurs as inflammation is part of
the healing process. Rest, ice, compression and elevation should provide adequate pain control initially.
Acetaminophen (Tylenol) can be taken as needed